procedures: native user auth docs (#2187)
codenvy/che-docs: modules/administration-guide/partials/proc_configuring-minikube-github-authentication.adoc

[id="configuring-minikube-github-authentication_{context}"]
= Configuring Minikube with GitHub Authentication

> Configure the OpenID Connect (OIDC) issuer to use GitHub authentication rather than preconfigured static users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure the {link-oidc-issuer} OpenID Connect (OIDC) issuer to use GitHub authentication rather than preconfigured static users.
```

> {prod-short} is preconfigured with static users. Configure the OpenID Connect (OIDC) provider to use GitHub authentication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Configure the OpenID Connect (OIDC) issuer to use GitHub authentication rather than preconfigured static users.
```

.Prerequisites

* {prod-short} is installed on Minikube. See xref:installation-guide:installing-che-on-minikube.adoc[].

.Procedure
. Get Minikube IP and remember it as `_<minikube_ip>_`:
+
----
$ minikube ip
----

. link:https://github.com/settings/applications/new[Create an OAuth App] for your Minikube instance in GitHub. See link:https://docs.github.com/en/developers/apps/building-oauth-apps/creating-an-oauth-app[GitHub documentation].
+
[source]
----
Application name: Eclipse Che <1>
Homepage URL: https://<minikube_ip>.nip.io <2>
Authorization callback URL: https://dex.<minikube_ip>.nip.io/callback <3>
----
+
<1> Name is only displayed on GitHub. It is not used internally so it can be any name.
<2> Main URL to Che instance.
<3> Callback URL to Dex. Chectl deploys Dex on `dex.` subdomain.

. In the GitHub OAuth application page, click btn:[Generate a new client secret] and remember the value of the generated client secret as `_<client_secret>_`.

> . edit Dex configmap `kubectl edit configmap dex -n dex`
> ```
> connectors:
> - type: github
>   id: github
>   name: GitHub
>   config:
>     clientID: <client_id> <1>
>     clientSecret: <client_secret> <2>
>     redirectURI: https://dex.<minikube_ip>.nip.io/callback <3>
> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Edit the {link-oidc-issuer} config map:
+
----
$ kubectl edit configmap dex -n dex
----
+
[source,yaml,subs="+attributes,macros,quotes"]
----
connectors:
- type: github
  id: github
  name: GitHub
  config:
    clientID: _<client_id>_ <1>
    clientSecret: _<client_secret>_ <2>
    redirectURI: https://dex._<minikube_ip>_.nip.io/callback <3>
----
```

[id="configuring-minikube-github-authentication_{context}"]

> = Configuring Minikube with GitHub Authentication

Reviewer: Is the procedure only for Minikube, excluding other Kubernetes distributions? Or for Kubernetes excluding OpenShift?

Author: minikube only

== Authentication on Kubernetes

> On {kubernetes}, link:https://github.com/oauth2-proxy/oauth2-proxy[OAuth2 Proxy] is deployed as che-gateway sidecar ensuring requests authentication. Then {kubernetes} must have configured OIDC issuer to know about users identities and CheCluster CR must be configured with:

Reviewer 2: should we somehow explicitly says that OIDC is a requirement now for using che with k8s.
Maybe add a reference https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/access-authn-authz/authentication/#openid-connect-tokens

Reviewer 2: maybe a separate page?

Author: see https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs/pull/2187/files#diff-5f3256312ccf179e558b8ce382575d79f96be22c8982ef26e1893f4151200e26R42
I haven't found any better place and @l0rd has created this issue https://github.com/eclipse/che/issues/20909 to provide help how to setup OIDC on various Kubernetes clusters. However, it will need some deeper investigation.

```
spec:
  auth:
    identityProviderURL: <oidc-issuer-url>
    oAuthClientName: <oauth-client-id>
    oAuthSecret: <oauth-client-secret>
```

> Chectl can configure minikube with link:https://dexidp.io/[Dex] as OIDC issuer with preconfigured static users. This is the default setup when deploying on minikube with {devworkspace} engine `chectl server:deploy --platform minikube --workspace-engine=dev-workspace`. Dex can serve as a bridge to 3rd party {identity-provider}, like GitHub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chectl can configure minikube with link:https://dexidp.io/[Dex] as OIDC issuer with preconfigured static users. This is the default setup when deploying on Minikube with {devworkspace} engine `chectl server:deploy --platform minikube --workspace-engine=dev-workspace`. Dex can serve as a bridge to 3rd party {identity-provider}, like GitHub.
```

> Chectl can configure minikube with link:https://dexidp.io/[Dex] as OIDC issuer with preconfigured static users. This is the default setup when deploying on Minikube with {devworkspace} engine `chectl server:deploy --platform minikube --workspace-engine=dev-workspace`. Dex can serve as a bridge to 3rd party {identity-provider}, like GitHub.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chectl can configure Minikube with link:https://dexidp.io/[Dex] as OIDC issuer with preconfigured static users. This is the default setup when deploying on Minikube with {devworkspace} engine `chectl server:deploy --platform minikube --workspace-engine=dev-workspace`. Dex can serve as a bridge to 3rd party {identity-provider}, like GitHub.
```

> == Authentication on Kubernetes
> On {kubernetes}, link:https://github.com/oauth2-proxy/oauth2-proxy[OAuth2 Proxy] is deployed as che-gateway sidecar ensuring requests authentication. Then {kubernetes} must have configured OIDC issuer to know about users identities and CheCluster CR must be configured with:
> ```
> spec:
>   auth:
>     identityProviderURL: <oidc-issuer-url>
>     oAuthClientName: <oauth-client-id>
>     oAuthSecret: <oauth-client-secret>
> ```
> 
> Chectl can configure Minikube with link:https://dexidp.io/[Dex] as OIDC issuer with preconfigured static users. This is the default setup when deploying on Minikube with {devworkspace} engine `chectl server:deploy --platform minikube --workspace-engine=dev-workspace`. Dex can serve as a bridge to 3rd party {identity-provider}, like GitHub.

Reviewer: Move this to the concept file. See https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs/pull/2187/files#r768447002 and https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs/pull/2187/files#r772922018

```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

{prod-short} is preconfigured with static users. Configure the OpenID Connect (OIDC) provider to use GitHub authentication.

.Prerequisites

* {prod-short} is installed on Minikube. See xref:installation-guide:installing-che-on-minikube.adoc[].

```

> === Setup GitHub as identity provider on Kubernetes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Procedure
```

> To setup GitHub as {prod-short} identity provider

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Get Minikube IP and remember it as `_<minikube_ip>_`:
+
----
$ minikube ip
----

```

> . Create OAuth App in GitHub at https://github.com/settings/applications/new (see link:https://docs.github.com/en/developers/apps/building-oauth-apps/creating-an-oauth-app[GitHub documentation]):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. link:https://github.com/settings/applications/new[Create an OAuth App] for your Minikube instance in GitHub. See link:https://docs.github.com/en/developers/apps/building-oauth-apps/creating-an-oauth-app[GitHub documentation].
```

+
[source]
----
Application name: Eclipse Che <1>
Homepage URL: https://<minikube_ip>.nip.io <2>
Authorization callback URL: https://dex.<minikube_ip>.nip.io/callback <3>
----
+
<1> Name is only displayed on GitHub. It is not used internally so it can be any name.
<2> Main URL to Che instance.
<3> Callback URL to Dex. Chectl deploys Dex on `dex.` subdomain.
+

> Note: To get minikube IP, run `$ minikube ip` in the terminal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: To get Minikube IP, run `$ minikube ip` in the terminal.
```

> +
> Note: To get Minikube IP, run `$ minikube ip` in the terminal.

Reviewer: Move to https://github.com/eclipse/che-docs/pull/2187/files#r772935863

```suggestion
```

> . On GitHub Generate new client secret for just created OAuth application

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. In the GitHub OAuth application page, click btn:[Generate a new client secret] and remember the value of the generated client secret as `_<client_secret>_`.
```

> . edit dex configmap `kubectl edit configmap dex -n dex`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. edit Dex configmap `kubectl edit configmap dex -n dex`
```

> . edit Dex configmap `kubectl edit configmap dex -n dex`

Reviewer: To be consistent with the other docs, shouldn't we rather edit the CheCluster CR?

Author: dex configuration is not configured by CheCluster CR

Reviewer: You mean it is an additional configuration that comes on top of "configure OIDC issuer"?

> Then {kubernetes} must have configured OIDC issuer to know about users identities and CheCluster CR must be configured with:

```
spec:
  auth:
    identityProviderURL: <oidc-issuer-url>
    oAuthClientName: <oauth-client-id>
    oAuthSecret: <oauth-client-secret>
```

Reviewer: I don't understand how creating a CheCluster CR results in a Dex deployment without configuration.

Reviewer: Do you mean something like: 

. Creating a CheCluster CR results in a Dex deployment with a default configuration with static users.

. To customize the Dex configuration, manual steps are required ...

Author: No. Dex is not configured by CheCluster CR at all. Chectl is the one who deploys and configures Dex and minikube to use Dex as OIDC provider. The configuration in CheCluster CR is just configuring Che to use the Dex instance. In case of different kubernetes flavors (AWS, Google, ...) we will require to set them with OIDC provider and set the same values in CheCluster CR to connect to that OIDC provider.

```
connectors:
- type: github
  id: github
  name: GitHub
  config:
    clientID: <client_id> <1>
    clientSecret: <client_secret> <2>
    redirectURI: https://dex.<minikube_ip>.nip.io/callback <3>
```
+
<1> OAuth client id copied from GitHub OAuth application
<2> OAuth client secret, generated at GitHub in previous step
<3> Callback URL to Dex. This must match configuration in GitHub OAuth application from step 1.
+
See link:https://dexidp.io/docs/connectors/github/[Dex documentation] for details

> Note: To remove dex static users, delete all `enablePasswordDB` and `staticPasswords` sections.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note: To remove Dex static users, delete all `enablePasswordDB` and `staticPasswords` sections.
```

[id="configuring-minikube-github-authentication_{context}"]
= Configuring Minikube with GitHub Authentication

> Configure the {link-oidc-issuer} OpenID Connect (OIDC) issuer to use GitHub authentication rather than preconfigured static users.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On Minikube, {prod-cli} provides a default OpenID Connect (OIDC) issuer, which can serve as a bridge to third party {identity-provider}, such as GitHub.
{link-oidc-issuer} is the default OIDC issuer, preconfigured with static users.
Configure {link-oidc-issuer} to use GitHub authentication.
```

+
[source]
----
Application name: Eclipse Che <1>
Homepage URL: https://<minikube_ip>.nip.io <2>
Authorization callback URL: https://dex.<minikube_ip>.nip.io/callback <3>
----
+
<1> Name is only displayed on GitHub. It is not used internally so it can be any name.
<2> Main URL to Che instance.
<3> Callback URL to Dex. Chectl deploys Dex on `dex.` subdomain.

. In the GitHub OAuth application page, click btn:[Generate a new client secret] and remember the value of the generated client secret as `_<client_secret>_`.

. Edit the {link-oidc-issuer} config map:
+
----
$ kubectl edit configmap dex -n dex
----
+
[source,yaml,subs="+attributes,macros,quotes"]
----
connectors:
- type: github
  id: github
  name: GitHub
  config:
    clientID: _<client_id>_ <1>
    clientSecret: _<client_secret>_ <2>
    redirectURI: https://dex._<minikube_ip>_.nip.io/callback <3>
----
+
<1> OAuth client id copied from GitHub OAuth application
<2> OAuth client secret, generated at GitHub in previous step
<3> Callback URL to Dex. This must match configuration in GitHub OAuth application from step 1.

> +
> See link:https://dexidp.io/docs/connectors/github/[Dex documentation] for details

Reviewer: Previous link is sufficient.

```suggestion
```

Note: To remove Dex static users, delete all `enablePasswordDB` and `staticPasswords` sections.

> . restart Dex pod to load new configuration `kubectl delete pod dex -n dex`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Restart the {link-oidc-issuer} pod:
+
----
$ kubectl delete pod dex -n dex
----
```

> . On next opening {prod-short} URL, user will be prompted with GitHub login

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.Verification steps

* Open {prod-short} URL. The dashboard displays GitHub login prompt.
```

[id="configuring-minikube-github-authentication_{context}"]
= Configuring Minikube with GitHub Authentication

On Minikube, {prod-cli} provides a default OpenID Connect (OIDC) issuer, which can serve as a bridge to third party {identity-provider}, such as GitHub.
{link-oidc-issuer} is the default OIDC issuer, preconfigured with static users.
Configure {link-oidc-issuer} to use GitHub authentication.

.Prerequisites

* {prod-short} is installed on Minikube. See xref:installation-guide:installing-che-on-minikube.adoc[].

.Procedure
. Get Minikube IP and remember it as `_<minikube_ip>_`:
+
----
$ minikube ip
----

. link:https://github.com/settings/applications/new[Create an OAuth App] for your Minikube instance in GitHub. See link:https://docs.github.com/en/developers/apps/building-oauth-apps/creating-an-oauth-app[GitHub documentation].
+

> [source]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[source,subs="+attributes,macros,quotes"]
```

----

> Application name: Eclipse Che <1>

Reviewer 3: shouldn't it be {prod-something} instead of Eclipse Che ?

Author: looks like variables does not work in `[source]`.

> Application name: Eclipse Che <1>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Application name: {prod-short} <1>
```

Homepage URL: https://<minikube_ip>.nip.io <2>
Authorization callback URL: https://dex.<minikube_ip>.nip.io/callback <3>
----
+
<1> Name is only displayed on GitHub. It is not used internally so it can be any name.

> <2> Main URL to Che instance.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<2> Main URL to {prod-short} instance.
```

Author: fixed

> <3> Callback URL to Dex. Chectl deploys Dex on `dex.` subdomain.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
<3> Callback URL to Dex. {prod-cli} deploys Dex on `dex.` subdomain.
```

Author: fixed
